.\" XCTYPE(3) Manual Page
.TH XCTYPE 3 "2025" "Extern Library" "Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
xctype \- Utility functions for character string manipulation

.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
#include "xctype.h"

char* xtolower(char* str);
char* xtoupper(char* str);
char* xtoascii(char* str);
.fi

.SH DESCRIPTION
The XCTYPE library provides utility functions for manipulating null-terminated C strings (`char*`).
These functions perform the following operations:

- **xtolower**: Converts all characters in the string to lowercase.
- **xtoupper**: Converts all characters in the string to uppercase.
- **xtoascii**: Converts all characters in the string to ASCII characters, replacing non-ASCII characters with `?`.

Each function allocates a new string for the result, and the caller is responsible for freeing the allocated memory once it is no longer needed.

.SH FUNCTIONS

.TP
.B xtolower
Converts a string to lowercase.

.PP
The `xtolower` function converts each character in the input string to its lowercase equivalent using the `tolower` function. If the string is already in lowercase, it remains unchanged.

.PP
**Parameters:**
.TP
* `str` - A pointer to a null-terminated string to be converted.

**Returns:**
.TP
* A new string with all characters converted to lowercase, or `NULL` if an error occurs.

**Errors:**
.TP
* `EINVAL` - Invalid argument (if `str` is `NULL`).
* `ENOMEM` - Out of memory (if memory allocation fails).

.TP
.B xtoupper
Converts a string to uppercase.

.PP
The `xtoupper` function converts each character in the input string to its uppercase equivalent using the `toupper` function. If the string is already in uppercase, it remains unchanged.

.PP
**Parameters:**
.TP
* `str` - A pointer to a null-terminated string to be converted.

**Returns:**
.TP
* A new string with all characters converted to uppercase, or `NULL` if an error occurs.

**Errors:**
.TP
* `EINVAL` - Invalid argument (if `str` is `NULL`).
* `ENOMEM` - Out of memory (if memory allocation fails).

.TP
.B xtoascii
Converts a string to ASCII characters, replacing non-ASCII characters with `?`.

.PP
The `xtoascii` function converts each character in the input string to an ASCII character if it falls within the ASCII range (0–127). Any non-ASCII characters are replaced with the question mark character (`?`).

.PP
**Parameters:**
.TP
* `str` - A pointer to a null-terminated string to be converted.

**Returns:**
.TP
* A new string containing only ASCII characters, or `NULL` if an error occurs.

**Errors:**
.TP
* `EINVAL` - Invalid argument (if `str` is `NULL`).
* `ENOMEM` - Out of memory (if memory allocation fails).

.SH MEMORY MANAGEMENT
Each of the functions in the XCTYPE library allocates memory for the resulting string using `malloc`. The caller is responsible for freeing this memory using the `free()` function once the string is no longer needed to avoid memory leaks.

.SH ERROR HANDLING
The functions return `NULL` and set the `errno` variable to indicate the type of error when one occurs. The possible error values are:

- `EINVAL`: Invalid argument (if `str` is `NULL`).
- `ENOMEM`: Out of memory (if memory allocation fails).

Before using the returned string, the caller should always check if the return value is `NULL` to ensure that no errors occurred during the operation.

.SH EXAMPLE
Here is an example of how to use the provided functions:

.nf
#include <stdlib.h>
#include "xctype.h"

int main() {
    char* str = "Hello World!";
    char* lower_str = xtolower(str);
    char* upper_str = xtoupper(str);
    char* ascii_str = xtoascii(str);

    // Always check if the result is NULL before using the string
    if (lower_str != NULL) {
        printf("Lowercase: %s\n", lower_str);
        free(lower_str);
    }

    if (upper_str != NULL) {
        printf("Uppercase: %s\n", upper_str);
        free(upper_str);
    }

    if (ascii_str != NULL) {
        printf("ASCII: %s\n", ascii_str);
        free(ascii_str);
    }

    return 0;
}
.fi

.SH LICENSE
This library is free software: you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the terms of the **GNU General Public License** as published by the Free Software Foundation, either version 3 of the License, or (at your option) any later version.

.SH SEE ALSO
`malloc(3)`, `free(3)`, `tolower(3)`, `toupper(3)`

.SH BUGS
No known bugs.

.SH AUTHORS
MrR736 <MrR736@users.github.com>
