.\" XSTDDEF(3) Base Header Manual Page
.TH XSTDDEF 3 "2025" "Extern Library" "Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
xstddef \- core portability, visibility, and compiler feature definitions
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
#include <xstddef.h>
.fi

.SH DESCRIPTION
The xstddef header provides the foundational portability and compiler
abstraction layer for the Extern Library. This header contains no public
functions. Instead, it supplies:

.RS
• Standard library header aggregation
• Windows and POSIX platform includes
• Compiler attribute wrappers
• Symbol visibility macros
• Portable inline definition
• Compiler-agnostic restrict keyword handling
.RE

These definitions are required by all other library headers such as
xmap(3), xstring(3), xwchar(3), and xlocale(3).

.SH PORTABILITY FEATURES
xstddef normalizes differences across compilers and operating systems.

.SS Inline compatibility
MSVC versions prior to 1900 replace 'inline' with '__inline'.

.SS Attribute wrappers
GCC and Clang variants are supported through __attribute__.

.SS Symbol visibility
Functions and data exported from shared libraries may be marked using:

.RS
XSTDDEF_EXPORT_API
XSTDDEF_IMPORT_API
XSTDDEF_INLINE_API
.RE

These macros expand to compiler-specific visibility attributes when
available.

.SS restrict compatibility
When supported, __restrict expands to the compiler's restrict keyword.
On older compilers it becomes a no-op.

.SH PLATFORM SUPPORT
On Windows, additional headers are automatically included:

.RS
process.h, windows.h, fcntl.h, io.h
.RE

On POSIX systems:

.RS
unistd.h, sys/wait.h
.RE

These provide consistent access to system APIs across all platforms.

.SH NOTES
xstddef is not intended to be used directly by applications. It is a
technical support header required internally by all Extern Library
components.

.SH SEE ALSO
xmap(3), xstring(3), xwchar(3), xlocale(3)

.SH AUTHOR
Written by MrR736.

.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright (C) 2025.
Licensed under the GNU GPL version 3 or later.
